--- PAGE 1 ---

228

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

An Introduction to Docker and Analysis of its Performance

Babak Bashari Rad, Harrison John Bhatti, Mohammad Ahmadi
Asia Pacific University of Technology and Innovation
Technology Park Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

Summary

Docker provide some facilities, which are useful for developers
and administrators. It is an open platform can be used for building,
distributing, and running applications in a portable, lightweight
runtime and packaging tool, known as Docker Engine. It also
provide Docker Hub, which is a cloud service for sharing
applications. Costs can be reduced by replacing traditional virtual
machine with docker container. It excellently reduces the cost of
re-building the cloud development platform.
Key words:

Docker, Docker Container, Virtual Machine, Virtualization,
Cloud Computing.

Introduction

Docker is an open source platform that run applications and
makes the process easier to develop, distribute. The
applications that are built in the docker are packaged with
all the supporting dependencies into a standard form called
a container. These containers keep running in an isolated
way on top of the operating system's kernel. The extra layer
of abstraction might effect in terms of performance [1].
Even thou, the technologies of the container have been
around for over 10 years, but docker, a generally new
hopeful is right now a standout amongst the best
innovations, since it accompanies new capacities that prior
technologies did not have. Initially, it gives the facility to
create and control containers. Besides that, applications can
easily be packed into lightweight docker containers by the
developer. These virtualized applications can easily be
worked anywhere without any alteration. Moreover, docker
can convey more virtual situations than different
innovations, on the same equipment. To wrap things up,
docker can easily coordinate with third-party instruments,
which help to easily deploy and manage docker containers.
Docker containers can easily be deployed into the cloud-
based environment [2].

This paper is a review on technology of docker, and will
analyse its performance by a systematic literature review.
The article is organised as follow. Next section will
introduce the technology of docker. In Section 3, a more
detailed description of docker and its components will be
presented. Section 4 briefly compare technology of Virtual
Machine and Docker. Sections 5 and 6 will discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of docker container,

Manuscript received March 5, 2017
Manuscript revised March 20, 2017

respectively. In Section 6 and 7, we briefly review few
recent researches on measuring the performance of Docker
and compare it with other container technologies. Finally,
in section 9 and 10, features in virtual machines and
containers will be briefly summarised, following with a
short summary of the paper.

Docker

Docker provides a facility to automate the applications
when they are deployed into Containers. In a Container
environment where the applications are virtualized and
executed, docker adds up an extra layer of deployment
engine on top of it. The way that docker is designed is to
give a quick and a lightweight environment where code can
be run efficiently and moreover it provides an extra facility
of the proficient work process to take the code from the
computer for testing before production [9]. Russell (2015)
confirms that, as quick as it is possible docker allows you to
test your code and deploy it into the production environment
[6]. Turnbull (2014) concludes by saying that docker is
amazingly simple [9]. Certainly, you can begin with a
docker with a simple configuration system, a docker binary
with Linux kernel.

Docker Inside

There are four main internal components of docker,
including Docker Client and Server, Docker Images,
Docker Registries, and Docker Containers. These
components will be explained in details in the following
sections.

3.1 Docker Client and Server

Docker can be explained as a client and server based
application, as depicted in Figure 1.

The docker server gets the request from the docker client
and then process it accordingly. The complete RESTful
(Representational state transfer) API and a command line
client binary are shipped by docker. Docker daemon/server
and docker client can be run on the same machine or a local
docker client can be connected with a remote server or
daemon, which is running on another machine [9].

--- PAGE 2 ---

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

229

Docker Client

Docker Client

Docker Client

Docker Daemon

Docker Host

Docker
Container

Fig. 1 Docker architecture [9].

3.2 Docker Images

There are two methods to build an image. The first one is to
build an image by using a read-only template. The
foundation of every image is a base image. Operating
system images are basically the base images, such as
Ubuntu 14.04 LTS, or Fedora 20. The images of operating
system create a container with an ability of complete
running OS. Base image can also be created from the
scratch. Required applications can be added to the base
image by modifying it, but it is necessary to build a new
image. The process of building a new image is called
"committing a change". The second method is to create a
docker file. The docker file contains a list of instructions
when "Docker build" command is run from the bash
terminal it follows all the instructions given in the docker
file and builds an image. This is an automated way of
building an image.

3.3 Docker Registries

Docker images are placed in docker registries. It works
correspondingly to source code repositories where images
can be pushed or pulled from a single source. There are two
types of registries, public and private. Docker Hub is called
a public registry where everyone can pull available images
and push their own images without creating an image from
the scratch. Images can be distributed to a particular area
(public or private) by using docker hub feature.

3.4 Docker Containers

Docker image creates a docker container. Containers hold
the whole kit required for an application, so the application
can be run in an isolated way. For example, suppose there
is an image of Ubuntu OS with SQL SERVER, when this
image is run with docker run command, then a container
will be created and SQL SERVER will be running on
Ubuntu OS.

Virtual Machine vs. Docker

Virtualization is an old concept, which has been in used in
cloud computing, after IaaS has been accepted as a crucial
technique for system constitution, resource provisioning,
and multi-tenancy. Virtualized resources play the main role
in solving the problems using the core technique of cloud
computing. The Figure 2 shows the architecture of the
virtual machine.

App 1
Bins/Libs

App 2
Bins/Libs

App 3
Bins/Libs

Guest OS

Guest OS

Hypervisor

Guest OS

Host Operating System
Infrastructure

Fig. 2 Virtual Machine architecture [11].

Hypervisor is lying between host and guest operating
systems. It is a virtual platform and it handles more than one
operating system in the server. It works between the
operating system and CPU. The virtualization divides it into
two segments: the first one is Para-Virtualization and the
second one is Full Virtualization [3]. Figure 3 depicts the
architecture of the Docker Container.

Linux containers are managed by the docker tool and it is
used as a method of operating system level virtualization.
Figure 3 shows that in single control host there are many
Linux containers, which are isolated. Resources such as
Network, Memory, CPU, and Block I/O are allocated by
Linux kernel and it also deals with cgroups without starting
virtualization machine [8].

--- PAGE 3 ---

230

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

App 1

Bins/Libs

App 2
Bins/Libs

App 3
Bins/Libs

Docker Engine

Operating System

Infrastructure

Fig. 3 Docker Container architecture [11].

According to Waldspurger (2002), in the Linux containers,
an architecture is to manage CPU and distribute its
resources more proficiently. In any example of Hyper-V or
VMWare, because of overhead incurred, it is not easy to run
more than ten virtual machines [13]. Up to a great extent,
this issue has been solved by the containers. Containers only
utilize those resources, which are needed for the services or
applications. Therefore, on a weak configured machine,
above 50 requests of the containers can be executed.
For example, suppose an organisation provides email
security services. The major functions of these services are
to check emails for viruses, spam, and malware. Moreover,
it could manage to transfer messages to the agent, logs and
report delivery failure if the product is installed in the cloud
[10]. Mostly in these cases, there is no use of any associated
dependencies or OS level libraries or any kernel data
structure. Therefore, it is worthwhile to containerized every
component by sandboxing them utilizing OpenVZ or
Docker instead of having virtual machines.

In many enterprises, virtual machines are used to perform
element testing. In this process, a lot of CPU resources and
memory space are consumed. Whereas, container
technology provides a guarantee to their users that excess of
a workload would not affect the efficiency of the resources.
The container takes less time for installation as compared to
virtual machines, so the adaptability of containers is much
higher than VMs.

Furthermore, both Docker and OpenVZ have been under
great examination in terms of their security aspects. When
isolation is reduced, it directly affects the security, which
also decreases rapidly. Root users of Linux can easily get
access to containers as containers also use the same kernel
and operating system. The isolation of docker is not as
strong as a virtual machine, even though docker isolates the
application, which is running in the docker container from
its primary host. Additionally, it is possible that some of the
applications would not be able to run in a containerized

technology and they need to run on a different operating
system.

Advantages of Docker Container

The demand and the advancement of Linux containers
can be seen in the last few years. Docker has become
popular very quickly, because of the benefits provided
by docker container. The main advantages of docker
are speed, portability, scalability, rapid delivery, and
density.

5.1 Speed

Speed is one of the most exceedingly touted advantages of
Containers. When the benefits of using docker are
highlighted, it would be incredible not to mention about the
speed of docker in the conversation (Chavis & Architect,
2015). The time required to build a container is very fast
because they are really small. Development, testing, and
deployment can be done faster as containers are small.
Containers can be pushed for testing once they have been
built and then from there, on to the production environment
[12].

5.2 Portability

Those applications that are built inside docker containers
are extremely portable. These portable applications can
easily be moved as a single element and the performance
remains the same [12].

5.3 Scalability

Docker has the ability that it can be deployed in several
physical servers, data servers, and cloud platforms. It can
also be run on every Linux machine. Containers can easily
be moved from a cloud environment to local host and from
there back to cloud again at a fast pace. Adjustments can
easily be done; the scale can simply be adjusted by the user
according to the need [5].

5.4 Rapid Delivery

The format of a Docker Containers is standardized so
programmers do not have to stress over one another's tasks.
The responsibility of the administrator is to deploy and
maintain the server with containers, whereas the
responsibility of the programmer is to look after the
applications inside the docker container. Containers can
work in every environment as they have all the required
dependencies embedded within the applications and they
are all tested [12]. Docker provides a reliable, consistent,
and improved environment, so predictable results can be

--- PAGE 4 ---

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

achieved when codes are moved between development, test
and production systems (Chavis & Architect, 2015).

5.5 Density

Docker uses the resources that are available more efficiently
because it does not use a hypervisor. This is the reason that
more containers can be run on a single host as compared to
virtual machines. The performance of a Docker Containers
is higher because of higher density and no overhead wastage
of resources [5].

Disadvantages of Docker Container

There are some drawbacks of docker containers, which are
listed below [1, 4]:

Complete virtualization is not provided by a docker
because it depends on the Linux kernel, which is
provided by the local host.

Currently, docker does not run on older machines. It
only supports 64-bit local machines.

The complete virtualized environment must be
provided by the docker container for Windows and
Mac machines. Even though the boot2docker tool fills
this gap, but still, it should be checked whether it makes
obstructions to acceptance by users of these systems or
the integration and performance with the host
machine's operating system are adequate [4].

It is necessary that the possibility of security issues
should be evaluated. Building off trusting binaries
could be made easier by digitally signing docker
images, for future support.

An important concern is to check if the teaching
community or scientific researcher will significantly
think of adopting docker.

Docker Performance

Seo et al. (2014) used two servers with the same
configuration in the cloud environment. One server was
used for docker and the other one was for an Open Stack
platform for KVM by means of a virtualization tool [8].
According to him, a VM works independently. This factor
make it easy to apply and manage the policy of network,
security, user, and the system. However, docker does not
contain a guest operating system. Therefore, it takes very
little time in distributing and gathering images. The boot
time is also very short. These are the main advantages of
utilizing Docker Cloud as compared with VM Cloud.
Scheepers (2014) compares LXC and Xen virtualization
technologies to benchmark some applications [7]. He
explains that Xen would be a better choice in the sense of
equally distributing resources, performance is not

231

dependent on the other tasks, and it is executed on the same
machine. However, LXC is much better in the sense of
getting most of the hardware resources or for the execution
of smaller isolated processes. In private and dot clouds,
LXC is a better option.

Felter et al. (2014) evaluate the performance of three
different environments, Native, Docker, and KVM [3]. He
clarifies that containers and VMs are both mature
innovation that has profited from last 10 years of
incremental equipment and programming enhancements.
According to this research, docker is equivalent to or
surpasses KVM execution for each situation they tried.
Their outcomes demonstrate that both KVM and docker
present irrelevant overhead for CPU and memory execution.
It has also been shown that the overall performance of
docker is better than the Local Host, as the applications
were executed and responded faster than in Local Host.
Moreover, fewer hardware resources were used in docker
container to perform the tasks.

Docker is really a future demanding technology. As users
and developers would know more about the docker and its
capabilities then they would consider replacing traditional
virtualization with docker technology. Docker provides
many simple and useful features. To get the best
performance and results, it is highly recommended to move
up from the default configuration. Containers provide
advanced density, better performance, scalability, and
usability as compared with traditional virtualization
because containers smartly utilize its resources, which
reduce the chance of unnecessary overhead. Containers are
better in performance than virtual machine, because
containers take less start-up time. Docker has removed the
biggest issue of "dependency". Now containers have all of
their required dependencies, which help containers to be
properly built, and to execute them in any docker
environment. An additional layer of isolation is provided by
the container, which increases the containers' security.
Docker is not as insecure as people normally think, but it
provides a complete protection.

Docker vs. other Container Technology

In this section, the performance of application virtualization
and the performance of the docker container will be
discussed, and the evaluation of other containerize
technology will be compared and reviewed. Seo et al.
(2014) summarize that there is no guest OS of docker in the
cloud, so the storage and the wastage of CPU resources are
less [8]. The images are not disturbed; boot time is faster
and the time of generating the images is short. These are the
benefits of docker cloud in comparison with VM Cloud.
They used two similar servers with the same configuration
in the cloud environment. One server was used for docker
and the other one was for an Open Stack platform for KVM

--- PAGE 5 ---

232

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

by means of a virtualization tool. Ubuntu Server was used
as a base platform [8].

To calculate the approximate boot-time, 20 images were
generated on each server and boot time was checked. Figure
4 shows that the boot time of docker is lesser than the boot
time of KVM. Docker uses the Host OS, whereas KVM
uses Guest OS. Thus, the boot time of docker is shorter than
the boot time of KVM.

15
14
23

10

2109876543210

Docker

KVM

Fig. 4 Docker vs KVM Average boot time [8].

To calculate the operational speed, python language was
used. Figure 5 shows that operation speed of 100,000 is
averagely around 4.5s. To measure the operation speed,
they obtain the average process time and standard deviation,
by repeating the same process 100 times on docker and VM.

Calculation performance

25

20

15

10

5

100000

calculation speed VM

200000

calculation speedis) Dockar

Fig. 5 CPU Calculation Performance [8].

Figure 5 shows the calculation speed of docker is slightly
faster than the calculation speed of the VM [7].

Seo et al. (2014) concluded that VM works independently
[8]. This is one of the reasons that it is easy to apply and
manage the policy of network, security, user, and the system.
However, docker does not contain a guest operating System.
Therefore, it takes very less time in distributing and
gathering images. Its boot time is also very short. These are
the main advantages of utilizing docker cloud as compared
with VM Cloud.

Scheepers (2014) compares LXC and Xen virtualization
technologies to benchmark some applications [7]. For this
purpose, Scheepers uses two servers Core OS 324.3.0 and
XenServer 6.2 with docker version 0.11.1. The
configuration of these systems is RAM 4GB, CPU Intel
Xeon Quad core and the virtualization support is Intel VT-
X. The base operating system is Ubuntu 12.04 and
containers will run on both machines. 2GB of memory is
allotted to the first virtual machine and Apache 2.2,
WordPress 3.9 and PHP 5.3. This was used as an application
Server. 1GB of memory is used by the second virtual
machine with MYSQL Database 5.5. This database was
filled by the WordPress sample contents. This machine was
used as a database Server. JMeter was used as a
benchmarked tool.

Figure 6 shows that LXC experienced less overhead as
compared to Xen when the SELECT query was run. The
focus on running this benchmark process is to see the
utilization of the CPU and the performance of the Network
speed because these are the main resources consumed in this
test.

45

Benchmark execution time (ms)

0505

XerServer (Ken)

CoreOS (LXC)

Fig. 6 Time in millisecond to complete a one SQL select query [7].

Figure 7 shows that in Xen setup, it took 16 seconds to
accomplish when the INSERT query was run in the
database, whereas in LXC setup it took longer-around 335
seconds. This reveals the inability of LXC container to
isolate resources efficiently.

Benchmark execution

time (ms)

400000

350000

300000

250000

200000

150000

100000

50000

0

XenServer (Xen)

CoreOS (LXC)

Fig. 7 Time in millisecond to complete 10,000 SQL INSERT queries [7].

--- PAGE 6 ---

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

233

Scheepers (2014) concludes that Xen would be a better
choice in the sense of equally distributing resources,
performance is not dependent on the other tasks, and it is
executed on the same machine [7]. However, LXC is much
better in the sense of utilizing most of the hardware
resources or the execution of smaller isolated processes. In
private and dot clouds, LXC is a better option..

Felter et al. (2014) evaluated the performance of three
different environments, Native, Docker, and KVM [3].
Overhead issues are also highlighted in their research.
Scenarios were investigated where more than one hardware
resource was completely utilized. To perform the tests, they
used an IBM x3650 M4 server, 16 core processors of Xeon
E5-2665, Two Intel Sandy Bridge-EP of 2.4 3.0 GHz and
256 GB of RAM. To make a non-uniform memory access,
two processors were linked together with QPI link. Cloud
providers also use this kind of similar Server. The base
operating system was Ubuntu 13.10, docker version 1.0.
Linux kernel 3.11.0, libvirt version 1.1.1 and QEMU 1.5.0.
This Figure 8 shows that the average size of 1 MB was used
for I/O, little over 60 seconds by measuring the performance
of sequential read and write. In this case, slight overhead
can be seen by Docker and KVM. In other cases, KVM has
almost a four times performance difference.

Throughput (MB/s)

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

I

Sequential Read Sequential Write

Fig. 8 Sequential I/O throughput (MB/sec) [3].

Native
Docker
KVM

Figure 9 demonstrates the execution of irregularly read,
write and mixed workloads utilizing a 4 kB square size and
simultaneousness of 128, which we tentatively determined
gives the greatest execution to this specific SSD. As we
would expect, docker acquaints no overhead contrasted and
Linux, however, KVM conveys just have the same number
of IOPS since every I/O operation must experience QEMU.
While the VM's supreme execution is still very high, it
utilizes more CPU cycles per I/O operation, leaving less
CPU accessible for application work.

IOPS

120000

100000

80000

60000

40000

20000

0

Random Random Random
Read Write Mixed

Fig. 9 Random I/O throughput (IOPS) [3].

Native
Docker

KVM

Felter et al. (2014) conclude that containers and VMs are
both mature innovations that have profited from the last 10
years of incremental equipment and programming
enhancements [3]. When all is said and done, docker is
equivalent to or surpasses KVM execution for each
situation we tried. Our outcomes demonstrate that both
KVM and docker present irrelevant overhead for CPU and
memory execution.

To conclude these past works, regardless of utilizing
distinctive techniques and having diverse centres, one thing
is common that is measured and comparing the performance
of applications and different types of containerized and
virtualized technology.

Virtual Machines vs. Containers

Table 1 compare features of different containerized and
virtual machine technologies. Virtual machine uses an extra
layer between the host operating system and guest operating
system. This layer is known as a Hypervisor. Whereas
docker adds up an extra layer between host operating
systems and where the applications are virtualized and
executed, which is known as a Docker Engine. As docker
does not use any guest operating system that makes a big
difference in performance between a docker container and
a virtual machine technology. In Table 1, the performances
of applications running in different containers and virtual
machines are also briefly compared.

As it is given in the table above, according to Seo et al.
(2014) the docker performance is better than KVM, in terms
of boot time and calculation speed [8], whereas Felter et al.
(2014) proves that there is no difference of wastage of
resources (overhead) between Docker and KVM but there
is a noticeable difference in execution, as KVM is faster
than Docker [3]. Scheepers (2014) found out that LXC takes
a longer time to accomplish tasks, whereas Xen Server takes
less time [7]. LXC is better in the sense of fewer wasted
resources while Xen is better in the sense of equally
distributing resources.
--- PAGE 7 ---
234

IJCSNS International Journal of Computer Science and Network Security, VOL.17 No.3, March 2017

Table 1: Comparison Table based on Different Virtual Machines and Containerized Technology

"Seo et al. (2014) [8]
",,"Scheepers (2014) [7]
",,,"Felter et al. (2014) [3
","]
"
"Docker
","KVM
","XenServer
(Xen)
","CoreOS
